company_name: Microsoft
year: 2023
ticker: MSFT
fiscal_period: FY 2023
headquarters: Redmond, Washington, United States
ceo: Satya Nadella
founded: 1975
industry: Software, cloud computing, AI, productivity software, gaming, devices
revenue_usd_billions: 211.9
net_income_usd_billions: 72.4
employee_count: 221000

Microsoft is a global technology company focused on software, cloud infrastructure, developer tools, productivity platforms, AI, gaming, and enterprise services. Founded in 1975, the company operates across major business groups that include Productivity and Business Processes, Intelligent Cloud, and More Personal Computing. Satya Nadella served as chairman and chief executive officer in fiscal year 2023.

In fiscal year 2023, Microsoft reported a record $211.9 billion in revenue and $72.4 billion in net income. The company highlighted strong demand for Azure, Office 365 Commercial, LinkedIn, and Dynamics, while some consumer and device categories were weaker. Microsoft Cloud revenue reached $111.6 billion for the year.

The 2023 period was marked by Microsoft's accelerated push into generative AI. The company emphasized Azure OpenAI Service, Microsoft 365 Copilot, GitHub Copilot, security offerings, and enterprise AI tooling across the stack. Microsoft also continued to position Azure, data platforms, developer tools, and productivity applications as core assets for enterprise AI adoption.

Additional operating context for Microsoft in 2023:

Microsoft's operating structure in fiscal 2023 was organized around three main segments: Productivity and Business Processes, Intelligent Cloud, and More Personal Computing. Productivity and Business Processes included commercial and consumer productivity software, LinkedIn, and Dynamics. Intelligent Cloud included Azure, server products, enterprise services, and other cloud infrastructure offerings. More Personal Computing included Windows, devices, search and news advertising, and gaming.

This segment framing is useful for chunking and retrieval because Microsoft spans consumer software, enterprise software, cloud infrastructure, developer tools, cybersecurity, and gaming. A single company file can therefore contain entities such as Azure, Windows, Office, Teams, GitHub, LinkedIn, Dynamics, Surface, Xbox, and Activision Blizzard while still referring to the same corporate profile.

Azure remained one of Microsoft's most important growth drivers in 2023. Enterprises used Azure for compute, storage, analytics, databases, machine learning, security, application hosting, and hybrid cloud workloads. Microsoft's cloud strategy also benefited from adjacency with Microsoft 365, enterprise identity, security tooling, data platforms, and developer ecosystems. In practical terms, many enterprise customers were not buying isolated products. They were buying a bundled Microsoft stack.

The productivity layer remained equally important. Microsoft 365, Office Commercial, Teams, Outlook, Word, Excel, PowerPoint, SharePoint, and related collaboration tools anchored Microsoft's role in day-to-day enterprise workflows. LinkedIn and Dynamics added business-network and business-application exposure, while GitHub and Visual Studio kept Microsoft deeply embedded in developer workflows.

Fiscal 2023 was also notable for AI platform positioning. Microsoft deepened its OpenAI partnership, expanded Azure OpenAI Service, and introduced Copilot branding across several products. GitHub Copilot became one of the clearest examples of a commercially deployed generative AI tool for software development. Microsoft 365 Copilot signaled the company's ambition to bring AI assistance directly into productivity software used by enterprise customers.

Another major event in 2023 was the completion of the Activision Blizzard acquisition. That transaction strengthened Microsoft's gaming business and expanded its content portfolio alongside Xbox, Game Pass, Xbox Cloud Gaming efforts, and previous gaming assets such as Bethesda through ZeniMax. This adds a different semantic cluster to the file, which is useful when testing retrieval across software, cloud, AI, and gaming terminology.

Selected company facts and entities relevant to 2023 chunking experiments:
Microsoft founders: Bill Gates and Paul Allen
Microsoft CEO in FY2023: Satya Nadella
Main cloud platform: Microsoft Azure
Major productivity suite: Microsoft 365
Major developer platforms: GitHub and Visual Studio
Major enterprise application families: Dynamics and Teams
Major gaming brands: Xbox, Game Pass, Activision Blizzard, Bethesda
Selected strategic themes in 2023: generative AI, cloud expansion, enterprise productivity, developer tools, security

Analyst-style summary for retrieval testing:

Microsoft in fiscal 2023 was increasingly defined by the combination of cloud scale, productivity software distribution, developer platform reach, and AI commercialization. The company could approach the same customer through Windows, Microsoft 365, Azure, Teams, GitHub, security products, or gaming services depending on context. For chunking experiments, that breadth creates a useful challenge because related answers may be expressed in segment language, product language, or AI strategy language.
